Yale University professor honored for groundbreaking research on dark matter and black hole physics.

Priyamvada Natarajan, winner of the 2025 Dannie Heineman Prize for Astrophysics Natarajan

WASHINGTON, Jan. 16, 2025 – The Heineman Foundation, American Institute of Physics, and American Astronomical Society are pleased to announce Priyamvada Natarajan as the winner of the 2025 Dannie Heineman Prize for Astrophysics.

Natarajan was selected for her groundbreaking contributions to advancing our understanding of dark matter substructure in galaxy clusters, the formation and fueling of black holes, and their feedback into the surrounding environment.

“AIP is proud to recognize the achievements of Dr. Natarajan and her research on dark matter and the formation of black holes,” said Michael Moloney, chief executive officer of AIP. “Her work has laid the foundation for modeling of black hole populations across the lifetime of the universe, which can be validated by direct observations.”

Natarajan is the Joseph S. and Sophia S. Fruton Professor in the astronomy and physics departments at Yale University. She also serves as the chair of the Department of Astronomy at the university.

Born in Coimbatore, India, Natarajan came to the U.S. to study physics and mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. She received a Master of Science from the MIT Program in Science, Technology and Society and traveled to the University of Cambridge in the U.K. to study astrophysics through the Isaac Newton Fellowship.

While completing her doctorate at Cambridge’s Trinity College, she was the first woman in astrophysics to be elected as a Trinity fellow. Before accepting a professorship at Yale, she was a visiting postdoctoral fellow at the Canadian Institute for Theoretical Astrophysics in Toronto, Canada.

Natarajan’s research has been foundational to the field of cosmology. As a theoretical physicist with an interest in dark matter and black holes, she has focused on making maps of dark matter in galaxy clusters, the largest known concentrations of dark matter.

“The invisible ingredients of the universe have always deeply fascinated me,” Natarajan said. “While we now know how these components manifest in the universe, their true nature remains unknown, and I find these cosmic mysteries deeply inspiring.”

Dark matter repositories have enough gravity to bend light, which creates a type of telescope, a process known as gravitational lensing that allows for distant galaxy observation.

Natarajan is currently developing methods to use gravitational lensing to constrain dark energy models. Her work has created a powerful tool that utilizes gravitational lensing to its fullest.

Her research on black hole seeds has contributed to a new model of galaxy formation, one in which the first black holes evolved with the universe, rather than being created from the end state of the very first stars. Recent discoveries by the James Webb Space Telescope and Chandra X-Ray Observatory have validated one of her predictions regarding the formation of the first black holes, that a population of over-massive black hole seeds likely formed in the very early universe.

In 2016, she published “Mapping the Heavens: The Radical Scientific Ideas That Reveal the Cosmos.” This book chronicles the biggest discoveries in the field of cosmology in the past century.

“I was thrilled and excited to hear about this award, and this recognition from colleagues and peers is very meaningful,” Natarajan said. “I am delighted to be able to celebrate with my mother, who has played a critical role by enthusiastically supporting me unconditionally in everything I have done.”

Natarajan’s award of the 2025 Dannie Heineman Prize for Astrophysics was announced at the 245th AAS meeting in National Harbor, Maryland, on Jan. 16. She will be invited to speak at next year’s AAS Winter Meeting in Phoenix, Arizona, and will receive a certificate and a $10,000 award.

###

ABOUT THE DANNIE HEINEMAN PRIZE FOR ASTROPHYSICS

The prize is named after Dannie N. Heineman, an engineer, business executive, and philanthropic sponsor of the sciences. The prize was established in 1979 by the Heineman Foundation for Research, Education, Charitable and Scientific Purposes, Inc. Awarded annually by the AIP and the AAS, the prize consists of $10,000 and a certificate citing the contributions made by the recipient(s) plus travel expenses to attend the meeting at which the prize is bestowed. https://www.aip.org/aip/awards-and-prizes/heineman-astro

ABOUT AIP

As a 501(c)(3) non-profit, AIP is a federation that advances the success of our Member Societies and an institute that engages in research and analysis to empower positive change in the physical sciences. The mission of AIP (American Institute of Physics ) is to advance, promote, and serve the physical sciences for the benefit of humanity.

ABOUT AAS

The American Astronomical Society (AAS), established in 1899, is a major international organization of professional astronomers, astronomy educators, and amateur astronomers. Its membership of approximately 8,000 also includes physicists, geologists, engineers, and others whose interests lie within the broad spectrum of subjects now comprising the astronomical sciences. The mission of the AAS is to enhance and share humanity’s scientific understanding of the universe as a diverse and inclusive astronomical community, which it achieves through publishing, meetings, science advocacy, education and outreach, and training and professional development.

###

