Frida Polli, a neuroscientist, entrepreneur, investor, and inventor known for her leading-edge contributions at the crossroads of behavioral science and artificial intelligence, is MIT’s new visiting innovation scholar for the 2024-25 academic year. She is the first visiting innovation scholar to be housed within the MIT Schwarzman College of Computing.

Polli began her career in academic neuroscience with a focus on multimodal brain imaging related to health and disease. She was a fellow at the Psychiatric Neuroimaging Group at Mass General Brigham and Harvard Medical School. She then joined the Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences at MIT as a postdoc, where she worked with John Gabrieli, the Grover Hermann Professor of Health Sciences and Technology and a professor of brain and cognitive sciences.

Her research has won many awards, including a Young Investigator Award from the Brain and Behavior Research Foundation. She authored over 30 peer-reviewed articles, with notable publications in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, the Journal of Neuroscience, and Brain. She transitioned from academia to entrepreneurship by completing her MBA at the Harvard Business School (HBS) as a Robert Kaplan Life Science Fellow. During this time, she also won the Life Sciences Track and the Audience Choice Award in the 2010 MIT $100K Entrepreneurship competition as a member of Aukera Therapeutics.

After HBS, Polli launched pymetrics, which harnessed advancements in cognitive science and machine learning to develop analytics-driven decision-making and performance enhancement software for the human capital sector. She holds multiple patents for the technology developed at pymetrics, which she co-founded in 2012 and led as CEO until her successful exit in 2022. Pymetrics was a World Economic Forum’s Technology Pioneer and Global Innovator, an Inc. 5000’s Fastest-Growing company, and Forbes Artificial Intelligence 50 company. Polli and pymetrics also played a pivotal role in passing the first-in-the-nation algorithmic bias law — New York’s Automated Employment Decision Tool law — which went into effect in July 2023.

Making her return to MIT as a visiting innovation scholar, Polli is collaborating closely with Sendhil Mullainathan, the Peter de Florez Professor in the departments of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science and Economics, and a principal investigator in the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems. With Mullainathan, she is working to bring together a broad array of faculty, students, and postdocs across MIT to address concrete problems where humans and algorithms intersect, to develop a new subdomain of computer science specific to behavioral science, and to train the next generation of scientists to be bilingual in these two fields.

“Sometimes you get lucky, and sometimes you get unreasonably lucky. Frida has thrived in each of the facets we’re looking to have impact in — academia, civil society, and the marketplace. She combines a startup mentality with an abiding interest in positive social impact, while capable of ensuring the kind of intellectual rigor MIT demands. It’s an exceptionally rare combination, one we are unreasonably lucky to have,” says Mullainathan.

“People are increasingly interacting with algorithms, often with poor results, because most algorithms are not built with human interplay in mind,” says Polli. “We will focus on designing algorithms that will work synergistically with people. Only such algorithms can help us address large societal challenges in education, health care, poverty, et cetera.”

Polli was recognized as one of Inc.'s Top 100 Female Founders in 2019, followed by being named to Entrepreneur's Top 100 Powerful Women in 2020, and to the 2024 list of 100 Brilliant Women in AI Ethics. Her work has been highlighted by major outlets including The New York Times, The Wall Street Journal, The Financial Times, The Economist, Fortune, Harvard Business Review, Fast Company, Bloomberg, and Inc.

Beyond her role at pymetrics, she founded Alethia AI in 2023, an organization focused on promoting transparency in technology, and in 2024, she launched Rosalind Ventures, dedicated to investing in women founders in science and health care. She is also an advisor at the Buck Institute’s Center for Healthy Aging in Women.

"I'm delighted to welcome Dr. Polli back to MIT. As a bilingual expert in both behavioral science and AI, she is a natural fit for the college. Her entrepreneurial background makes her a terrific inaugural visiting innovation scholar,” says Dan Huttenlocher, dean of the MIT Schwarzman College of Computing and the Henry Ellis Warren Professor of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science.