Evanston, IL – World-renowned developmental biologist Janet Rossant begins as the new editor-in-chief of Stem Cell Reports, the journal of the International Society for Stem Cell Research (ISSCR). She takes over the position held by Martin Pera, The Jackson Laboratory, USA, for nearly six years.

“It is an exciting time of advances for stem cell science and the ISSCR, and I am thrilled to see Janet Rossant leading our Society journal,” said ISSCR President Valentina Greco. “Her deep scientific expertise, coupled with years of service to the ISSCR are an asset as we seek to publish high-quality primary research articles and commentaries that shape our field.”

Janet Rossant, CC, PhD, FRS, FRSC is an internationally recognized developmental and stem cell biologist, exploring the biology of the early embryo and its stem cells and their applications to understanding and treating human disease. She is Senior Scientist emeritus in the Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Program at the Hospital for Sick Children, University Professor emeritus in the Department of Molecular Genetics at the University of Toronto, and President and Scientific Director of the Gairdner Foundation. Dr. Rossant has also been actively involved in ethics and public policy discussions around stem cell research and genetic modifications. She is a member of Royal Societies of London and Canada and the National Academy of Sciences, USA. Dr. Rossant served as ISSCR President in 2013-2014, has contributed to initiatives including the ISSCR Guidelines for Stem Cell Research and Clinical Translation, and has served on numerous ISSCR committees and task forces.

“I have watched with pride the establishment and the ongoing growth of the journal in terms of its areas of focus and its impact over the past few years,” Janet Rossant, Editor-in-Chief, Stem Cell Reports said. “I hope to build on this strong foundation and make sure the journal continues to attract new readers to the outstanding science submitted by our community of stem cell researchers, within and outside of ISSCR.”

About Stem Cell Reports

Stem Cell Reports is the open access, peer-reviewed journal of the International Society for Stem Cell Research (ISSCR) for communicating basic discoveries in stem cell research, in addition to translational and clinical studies. Stem Cell Reports focuses on original research with conceptual or practical advances that are of broad interest to stem cell biologists and clinicians. Stem Cell Reports is a Cell Press partner journal. Find the journal on X: @StemCellReports.



About ISSCR

With nearly 5,000 members from more than 80 countries, the International Society for Stem Cell Research (@ISSCR) is the preeminent global, cross-disciplinary, science-based organization dedicated to stem cell research and its translation to the clinic. The ISSCR mission is to promote excellence in stem cell science and applications to human health.