I’m a professor of environmental health at Drexel University. I study how the impacts of pollution can differ because of a person’s surroundings and individual circumstances. This will be an important influence on children’s health as the climate changes, an area that I have focused on in recent years.

I had a grant from the Environmental Protection Agency to identify the relationships between heat, pollution and children’s health in New York State. It’s an important case study because New York State includes the most and least populated areas in the country, like Manhattan and the Adirondacks.

Instead of looking at things that can cause stress, like income inequality, and how those can make the effects of heat and pollution worse, we were trying to identify the resources in communities where children appear to be less affected by heat and pollution. This information can help identify the most cost-effective changes communities can make to protect their children.

We combined data on 22 million child emergency department visits and hospitalizations with U.S. census information. We also considered a wide range of community factors not included in those data sets — everything from supermarket locations, transportation access, voter registration and broadband access. A Ph.D. student in my lab reached out to 350 school districts in the state. So a lot of groundwork was done to build up a really complicated and huge database that represented a massive number of children statewide.

It was a three-year grant, but it built on research that we had been developing for over 15 years. Our early results showed that days with high air pollution and extreme temperatures did have more child emergency department visits.

On May 12, I received an email saying our project was to be terminated immediately. There was no warning, no conversation.

At the time, we were in the final stages of being able to combine our data to answer the critical question: Which community investments really matter, and how can they help children be more resilient to pollution and heat? The next step would have been to finish analyzing the data, but we weren’t able to get that far.

We appealed the cancellation and got a response stating that the project wasn’t within the scope of the current E.P.A. The administration has decided to close the entire division supporting this grant, the Office of Research and Development. It was funding my lab’s work, and the work of so many other people doing really important stuff in environmental health science.

An abrupt cancellation means that we will never get the payoff from so much upfront investment. We wanted another year to support our doctoral students and finish the work, and spend time reporting back to our community and government partners to make sure that they were getting all the information they were promised out of this process.

It’s a devastating time for labs, many of which are shutting down. And, as you can imagine, the familiarity needed to work with data sets as large as ours isn’t expertise that can be easily replaced.

Jane Clougherty is an interdisciplinary environmental health scientist and professor at Drexel University in Philadelphia.